good afternoon my name is james Dempsey
and it is now five o'clock on day two of
that annual drink from the Apple
firehose known as the Worldwide
Developers Conference
so as everybody's brain full yet good
we'll try to fix that this afternoon so
it's been very nice the past couple of
days
seeing former students who have gone
through our Apple I services classes
folks that I've been teaching web
objects to for the past couple of years
hearing about the stuff that they've
been doing with web objects and it's
been a lot of fun
so again other former students who
haven't said hi after the clatter after
the class after the session feel free to
say hey alright so today we're going to
talk about the enterprise objects
framework before we begin though I need
to take a couple of polls and I want you
to respond with loudest thunderous
applause you can if the question applies
to you so first how many folks were here
yesterday for Steve Hammonds
introduction to the web objects
technology session so please
and it's very obvious that it was a
session that you're all very
disappointed in from your response that
I just cannot wait until that is out on
DVD because I think it's going to just
bump Austin Powers off of the list for
me if if not that it's gonna do it too
dude where's my car so I'm not sure
which so we're here to talk about
webobjects the second thing I wanted to
pull you on is how many of you consider
yourself either brand new or relatively
uncertain or novice in the enterprise
objects phrase work again with the round
of applause which is a good size of the
audience which is very good because
that's what we're going to be talking
about now let's begin the introduction
this is an introduction of the
enterprise objects framework which is
more succinctly known as AOF and what
we're going to be talking about today in
in Steve Hammonds presale yesterday we
saw that web objects in EOF can be a lot
of fun he was wiring stuff up they got
maps flying all over the place and the
question you may ask yourself is is all
this stuff really that easy and the
answer is actually yes and no so yes it
is if you are doing traditional database
stuff inserting stuff fetching stuff out
creating new objects the answer is no if
you start having to do very complicated
things like you come into a situation
where they have a legacy database that's
been there for the past ten years and
their encoding all this information in
the primary key and so you have to
generate primary keys with EOF and then
other situations where they need you to
interact with some system that was
designed before people had any common
sense and so you have to you have to do
all these contorted things to get things
to work
and in those cases you know what without
even you know up in the picture it's
just hard now the nice thing about EOF
is that it allows you to solve those
almost impossible problems is it easy no
but are they incredibly hard problems
yes and does AOF lets you do it with
with with grace style panache and
without writing too much code definitely
so that's what we're gonna talk about
now what are we going to learn in this
session the first thing we're going to
learn about is y EO f anyway what's the
purpose what do I get where why am I in
this session what's going on here the
second thing we're going to talk about
is just a conceptual model about yo f
and how it works because we've seen
things flying out of databases on the
webpages today and yesterday and for the
rest of the week but I always get a
little suspicious when it seems a little
too magicky so we're going to demystify
a little bit of just what's going on
there we're not gonna go into
excruciating detail and then finally
we're going to do practical code for
basic database operations now yesterday
Steve Heymann a proud Canadian he he
said that Canadians they don't need
wizards they don't need assistance he
was going to use a display group to
fetch things well it's a little known
fact but a true fact that I am half
Canadian my father immigrated to this
country during the Great Molson beer
Famine of 1958
and he took the arduous journey 20
minute journey in his car to Maine and
never returned
except to visit family and friends
mainly because he liked the idea of
molson being imported so so that said I
have the Canadian blood of my father
racing through my veins yet I'm also a
rugged individualists American who
doesn't need a display group and so
therefore what we're gonna do in this is
we're going to see the programmatic code
that actually a display group is using
behind the scenes and expose another
level of the magic of the of' so that's
what we're doing now where does this all
fit into the big picture yo f is
actually a slight mist
AF the two that we're focusing on our AO
access and AO control and these are
frameworks they form the core of
database access if you're doing HTML
based web objects apps cocoa apps Java
client apps direct to Java client apps
direct to web apps anything that you see
in any of these sessions that is hitting
a database is using the frameworks we're
going to talk about all right that said
if you are a very good piano player
imagine you have never played the piano
before in your life
and for those of you who are either not
very good piano players like myself or
never seen a piano before imagine being
walked up to a piano and handed a piece
of music that looks like this you'd
probably say okay
it looks very complicated it looks very
daunting it looks like how am I ever
going to sit down and do this but we
know from experience we know that there
are people in the world who can sit down
at a piano and play this very piece of
music we know walking up to a piano that
it's in there somewhere I just don't
know how to get it out it's just like
EOF
because we know from the many years the
DOF has been in production in the
largest companies around the world we
know that e o F is able to solve some
problems that would make your head
literally explode with o I've heard
stories but just like you don't want to
hand this piece of sheet music to
somebody the very first time they sit
down at a piano you don't want to do
this those extraordinary complicated
things the very first time you deal with
EOF we know anybody who's gone down the
little trail of learning to play the
piano knows that you start here okay
and you say oh how disappointing but we
know that when you're starting to play
the piano somebody tells you take this
thumb put it on this key called middle C
and then just kind of walk up the scale
those are the fundamentals and you
practice that you do that over and over
again because those are the things you
do all the time when you're playing the
piano similarly we're gonna talk today
about those things that you do all the
time when you're working with AOF and
get started by playing with those things
rather than trying to sit down at the
piano for the first time and muddle
through that that's easy I could do that
okay enough with that now let's move on
and let's talk about ye o F what's the
whole point here anyway so from we can
look at EOF kind of from two points of
view one point being from the point of
view of I'm an object-oriented
programmer or individual who thinks that
way and then the point of view of I'm a
database kind of person and I'm not
really sure about all this so stuff
let's start talking from the object
perspective just the brief review we
have different types of things called
classes each of those classes stores
different pieces of information instance
variables state however we want to put
it
in addition each one holds on to certain
amounts of logic okay
canonical description of an object but
the big question being where do objects
sleep at night what happens when I need
to if it's a desktop application Coco
application I need to the user logs out
or shuts down the computer what happens
if I need to recycle an app on my server
what happens if the power goes out in
California and suddenly I've lost all
the states in my object so I need
somewhere to put that and I could put it
in a flat file write serialize it out
archive it have it all written out as
some big text file but once you get over
a certain number of objects that gets to
be ridiculous so you need some place to
stick the data and boy a database seems
like a pretty good idea that's what they
made them for and so it actually turns
out that in sticking information or
object related information into a
database it actually turns out to be a
pretty good match so of course we have
types of things in our object model maps
to tables in the database you've heard
this probably at least seven times in
each session so far because actually
this mapping is the key to EOF this is
the first fundamental thing that you
need to be thinking about and also of
course we have columns in the database
that hold different types of information
it maps so well to instance variables
and then each row in the database Maps
amazingly well to an instance of an
object of a particular class so that's
good for everything except for types
that are more complex than a string or a
number or dates how do i hook up things
that are complex objects and we know
that in Java we have an object that is
reffering
sing another complicated object it's not
a pointer mind you although we can get
null pointer exceptions which boggles my
mind um
don't understand that at all it's just a
point to a unique place in memory a
reference if you will but not a pointer
um what wouldn't do to have that in fact
in the database it actually works out
almost identically how it works each row
has a unique primary key and then in
another table a row has a place to store
the value of the unique primary key
called a join in the world of entity
relationship modeling from mapping that
object to relational model we call this
a relationship groovy so the points of
EOF is to go from a row to an object and
back how hard could that be now what is
an enterprise object anyway we hear this
term bandied about all the time
well we affectionately call them POS or
just because we don't want to say
enterprise object all the time all that
it really is is it's a object that
implements a certain interface the eeo
enterprise object interface
strangely enough although you would not
want to go and implement that interface
yourself that would be akin to you
getting up tomorrow morning and saying
you know I think I'm gonna invent this
round thing today that people can use to
roll on or something like that maybe
I'll call it a wheel yeah that'll be a
good idea
don't reimplemented class II Oh generic
record so it's all done for you all that
that does essentially is it allows these
objects to work with the enterprise
object framework and persist in the
database now why do I bring this up
because if you're looking through the
documentation or the class browser you
will see a lot of the methods take
arguments or return values of type II Oh
enterprise
object so that's from the object is
perspective from the database
perspective having taught folks over the
years I can tell you that yo f kin freak
a DBA outs completely they going because
as was mentioned in previous sessions
they you don't have to write any sequel
when you get the objects into your
application there's no primary key
there's no foreign key so it's kind of
like your entire world as a DBA is
you've been abstracted from it and it
that would freak me out too so as you
start working seriously on web objects
applications and you are working with
DBAs don't get cheesed off at them
because they are coming from a different
place and be very patient with them
because this is kind of like actually
it's a lot like getting dropped in the
middle of a foreign country where you
don't speak the language and things are
completely different everything you're
used to is not quite there anymore and
even worse yet it's all kind of right
there and you could get to it if you
wanted to but you're not supposed to so
you stick data in a database you can
also put logic in a database most
database vendors have devised some
procedural language you can store in the
database call the stored procedure let's
talk about EOF and how it can add value
or what it does in relationship to a
database so one is distributed
processing if I have a big website a big
I don't want to put all my logic in my
one database because in addition to
fetching and saving changes back to the
database it's processing all this stuff
so I can offload the processing to one
or multiple web objects applications
second thing I can do is write my logic
in standard Java I don't have to learn
Oracle's brand of some procedural thing
dynamically generated sequel as has been
kind of
testified to by a couple of folks up
here they didn't know sequel all that
well and to tell you the truth I could
not write a well-formed sequel statement
right now if you paid me a large sum of
money I have to check some documentation
why because using web objects in EOF for
the past few years I haven't needed to
and it's always done the job for me one
very very nice thing in POF is the
ability to connect to multiple data
sources and from the point of view of
your code you don't even necessarily
care where those objects came from where
those rows came from you're very nicely
abstracted from the idea of multiple
data sources and finally you get a
separate scratch pad for every user so
if you can imagine an application where
a lot of people are fetching information
or looking at information and they want
to maybe try a change okay I'm going to
update this number and see how it
affects related numbers well if you just
have a database the only place you can
store that change is in the database and
then you have people writing and
overriding over each other which is a
bad thing so in gof you have a place
where each user user can make edits
without affecting anybody else it's like
a little alternate universe where you
fetch in information and you can
literally make changes to that
information a little context to do
editing if you will um how's that name
pop into my head that is another very
useful thing about us in fact so useful
let's talk about that editing context
for a while the eeo editing context
class is the class it's like your go-to
guy if you want to do anything related
to all the basics of database access
you're going to be talking to the
editing context if you want to fetch
from the database you make up object
that specifies what you want and you
hand it to the editing context you
say go get it if you want to insert
objects you make a new one you hand it
to the editing context say here I want
to stick this into the database the next
time we save our changes back if you
want to well I've been watching The
Sopranos a lot if you want to whack an
object you're gonna take an object that
you've already fetched in and you tell
the editing context hey I don't want
that I want this thing gone I want to
delete it and it also when you're
changing objects you don't even have to
do anything the other thing context is
just watching just sitting there saying
okay you made a change I got you it's a
very nice thing and then at the end of
the day when you've done all your edits
you have the choice either to chuck them
revert the editing context or save all
of those changes in one big transaction
down to the database editing context
very important now we're gonna see some
code we're gonna walk through each of
these and I'll show you how to
programmatically do all of these items
now I brought up the display group
earlier the whoa display group which is
an object that sits on top of an editing
context and all of the magic that you've
seen right with dragging things up
things are being fetched automatically
they're all happening
they've all been happening because a
display group has been talking to the
real power behind the scenes the editing
context and so all of the methods that
you see here are essentially what the
display group magically has been sending
the editing context there really is when
you start to look at it not really so
much magic it just really looks that way
because the whole system's put together
so well let's get into it so fetching
when you start doing some fetching in
web objects you will find that there are
many techniques for fetching we've seen
a couple already one is using a display
group to fetch in the prior presentation
there was a method from geo utilities a
convenience method for fetching we're
going to see two ways to fetch in this
presentation no matter which technique
we use there's still a canonical thing
that always happens and that's what
we're going to go through the canonical
longhand way it's kind of like I'm going
to teach you long division and then
after that I'm gonna give you a
calculator so first you create a Phet
spec a Phet specification we'll see in a
moment just specifies what I want from
the database I have to get hold of an
editing context conveniently enough in a
web objects application every user has a
session and every session has access to
or can lazily create a default editing
context so it's very easy to get hold of
one and then I tell the editing context
hey here's a Phet specification go get
me the objects that match this the
editing context does the work of talking
to its friends at the lower levels in
the enterprise objects framework and you
get back
hes and what you get back is an array
of retrieved enterprise objects and you
have a choice you can either then you
have this array and you can manage that
array yourself so if you're adding new
objects to the editing context you might
also want them to stick them in that
array if you're deleting objects from
the editing context you might want to
remove them from the array so that when
you display that array everything looks
copacetic that is something actually
that a display group handles for you all
right so let's do a fetch specification
what are we going to get from the
database well the first thing we need to
tell it is what kind of thing are we
getting from the database the entity
name it's just a string it's the name of
the entity in the model what table are
we fetching against basically the next
thing is something called a qualifier
which is just a description it's
basically an oo description of the
criteria of what we're looking for and
then finally an array of sort orderings
and sort orderings always travel in a
pack they you ever find a lone one
they're always together in an array
and they determine what we're going to
sort on if you are a DBA that's
wonderful because I don't know any
sequel and you optimized my database and
that's great this is very analogous to
the where clause in a sequel statement
and the order by clause the qualifier
and the sort orderings so qualifier is
basically an object-oriented way of
describing a bunch of criteria so the
phrase I'm looking for employees whose
salary is greater than 5,000 and their
last name begins with a J well EEO
qualifier is a superclass and it has all
of these subclasses some of them are for
concatenating things together like an
end qualifier we also have or and not
all the good ones
yoky value qualifier is where we put
things like salary is greater than 5,000
now it would be a real pain in the butt
if I had to go and build all these
objects and hook them up myself so even
in the longhand canonical way there's a
slightly easier way to do that it's a
method called qualifier with qualifier
formats and essentially what it takes
it's a lot like a print F string in C
where you give it a string with a couple
of placeholders or formatting characters
percentage at sign and the second
argument is an array of arguments that
are going to get it plugged in to the
blanks it's like a programmatic Madlib
and so essentially what happens in this
code example is we make an array we make
an object integer 5,000 add an object
that's a string and then we call that
method and create a new qualifier and
what this code is going to create is
this object graph groovy and then sort
orderings these essentially take the
name of a key or the property that you
want to sort on and how you want to sort
ascending or descending etc and so forth
the order that you put them in the array
determines the precedence of the sort
how do we make them well we make an
array usually a mutable one so we can
add stuff to it and then we make new yo
sort orderings the name of the property
or key that we're sorting on and then
there are static variables in AO sort
ordering class that define the ways we
can sort compare us sending compared
descending and then we have case
insensitive versions of those for when
we're doing string compares then we
build the fetch spec we assume in this
case that we already have an array of
orderings we already have the qualifier
we use a three argument constructor to
create a fetch spec and give it the
pieces of info it needs the entity name
the qualifier of what we want and the
array of sort orderings if you want to
get everything back from the table in an
unsorted way you could build a special a
special fetch a vacation a fetch
specification that takes null for the
last two arguments and then finally
doing the fetch we get a hold of some
editing context and again the session
has one that we use as the default just
any old editing context just happens to
be stored in the session we can ask the
session for its default editing context
and we send the long but descriptive
method objects with fetch specification
we hand it to specification we get back
an array of objects the hard part is not
fetching
the hard part is building the
specification of what you want actually
that's sometimes true in software
development as well think about that
when you go home okay there's an easier
way the graphical fetch spec builder
that's part of EO modeler this I think
is when I saw this I just left for joy
it was a very happy day because I didn't
have to write all of this code to build
a fet specification everything that I
did in code I could now do in the model
and so I can graphically create and we
will see a demo of that in a little bit
we can create the qualifier this way
including building complex ands and ORS
and nots and we can also build sort
orderings this way so that we can not
have to make that array ourselves we can
just do it in a tool very nice now when
you build a qualifier however usually
you don't want to always get people
whose salary is greater than 5000 whose
first name starts with J you usually
want the user to type in some input so
you can do a fetch otherwise it's a
really boring app so in this graphical
fetch spec builder there are something a
little sneaky actually it's very cool
called qualifier bindings I can instead
of typing out a literal thing that I'm
qualifying against I can put in that
graphical fetch spec something that
reads something like last name like
dollar sign last name and that dollar
sign last name is a variable that's
going to get replaced at runtime with
whatever the user typed in now I take
that ingredient which again is kind of
like a Phet spec with some blanks in it
and how am I gonna fill those items in
well you kind of got the answer already
because it's on the slide in NS
dictionary that holds keys and values
the key in the dictionary that matches
that dollar sign variable I stick those
two together and whatever the value is
gets substituted in and voila I have my
fully formed qualifier which is very
very nifty now how do I do all this
tomfoolery well I can use a graphical
Phet spec using an EO utility in one
line of code I heartily recommend this
as one of the best ways to fetch
programmatically so we have an editing
context we've already gotten ahold of
probably from the session we have this
dictionary of values just calling it a
query dictionary and this method objects
with fet specific age
and bindings that's a static method of
the eyo utilities class we handed the
editing context we're going to use the
name of the entity we're fetching the
name of the fete spec in the model and
then finally the dictionary of stuff
that's going to get filled into the
blanks it's going to build the qualifier
for you fill in the blanks build the
fetch spec tell the editing context go
get me those objects with that fetch
specification get back the array and
hand it back to you creating and
inserting it's actually very very simple
to do it's a two-step process that a
utility lets you do in one step you need
to create an object and insert an object
as this slide kind of gives away you
make a new object and you can make as
many enterprise objects as you want and
they will never end up in the database
unless you insert them into an editing
context and save the changes what this
line of code does create an insert
instance is you hand it in editing
context the name of the entity you want
to make a new one of and it will make a
new one stick it in the editing context
ready to be saved and then you will also
get back a reference to that new object
so you can do what other what other
wonderful things you'd like to do with
it and then editing editing is the
easiest one of the wonderful things
about gof is that you get to use your
objects like objects if I want to set
and retrieve values I can use accessor
methods and as I'm using those accessor
methods they are automatically being
watched those changes by the editing
context so that the next time I save
changes the most recent data gets put
back into the database I also bring up
key value coding this has come up I
think in every session as part of the
fundamental magic of web objects in EOF
I would say just as a pointer because we
are not going to get into it here that
understanding key value coding and
dictionaries
especially NS mutable dictionaries we
can add and remove them
are probably two very key things to the
Zen of AOF and web objects so further
research for you all the idea though is
basically in key value coding it's just
an interface that declares instead of
always having to write two accessor
methods for every property set name get
name set salary get salary you know you
have 37 properties you end up with
what's that 674 74 accessor methods
let's have two and we just pass in the
name of the property we're trying to get
and set as a parameter rather than hard
coding it as a method name that is what
key value coding is which also means
that as I'm using objects that implement
key value coding and all the good ones
do I'm able to treat them and get inset
values in them in a very generic way
which is really very much at the core of
why we can do all the cool fun
drag-and-drop easy stuff that we saw
yesterday
and then finally deleting if you want to
get rid of a neo it's very simple you
call on your friend the editing context
and you say delete this object and it'll
put it on the hit list that thing is
going to be gone the next time you Save
Changes
so we've seen what for fetching
inserting updating and deleting we've
seen about what five lines of code very
difficult stuff now all of those changes
are just hanging out in that little
scratch pad in that editing context
they're not in the database they're not
bothering anybody else and in fact to
start from the bottom of the slide if
that user say hit a cancel button on
your web page you could in that action
method tell the editing context to
revert revert throw out all those
changes all those things you inserted
and changed and we're ready to delete
just chuck that all we're reverting um
or
to make things persist we tell that
editing context to save changes which is
going to take all of those pending edits
those inserts updates and deletes it's
going to send them all through EOF
they're a proper sequel gets generated
and what's the very nice thing though we
now have persistent objects ready to get
pulled back out with the next time and
they get fetched all right that is the
fundamental way that we deal with EOF
using an editing context now I'd like to
bring out Marc rest pass or up Marc rest
pass demo got extraordinaire who is
going to be walking us through a sample
app that does all of these things Marc
thank you my on everyone hear me all
right it's really bright up here okay
what we're going to do is start with the
browser
and we've written a small application so
I'm gonna start in the opposite way that
I've usually do demos and show the
application first so as you've heard so
much about crud that's what this data
this application does we have a small
database of songs it allows me to search
on these songs I can add songs I can
inspect the song I can delete it so
we've got a couple of fields here song
name and price of course but I leave
those blank as James said when you want
to fetch all of your objects you pass
null for the qualifier and null for
these sort orderings and you just get
back all the objects I can of course do
searches for a particular song and this
one is set up to do greater than or
equal to a price so pretty simple stuff
I can add a song here some tune and I've
got a few pop up buttons with some
preset categories so maybe we can take
Rock and Charles Mingus I could see
Mingus doing some rock and dirt a little
collaboration with Alice in Chains come
back and our research and now we've got
that same song I can hit the delete
button because it turns out Mingus
doesn't want to do that and I can
inspect any song and make a change to it
so you can see I actually have an mp3 of
this file on my home computer but since
this isn't my computer let's delete it
so that doesn't work and we go back take
a look at it of course I can hit cancel
and that reverts the changes so if I
were to make a lot of changes and clear
out all these fields hit cancel that
simply invokes revert on the editing
context so how do we do that starting
with search
big font starting with the search method
James described there's lots of ways
that you can can do this you can write
all the code you can create your fetch
specification through by creating your
and qualifier in this case we've got two
fields I'd have to create - geo key
value qualifiers to take an array of
those and pass them to an and qualifier
and make that let's create my sort
orderings create my fetch specification
that's all that to the end in context
and ask it to return all the objects or
I can just use the big font hold on I
can just ask it to the ER utilities
method to sort do the fetch for me
objects with specification and bindings
giving an editing context the name of an
entity the name of my fetch back and the
query dictionary so I'm going to talk a
bit about the graphical fetch backs in
eyo modeler because as James was going
through all that you can see it can get
pretty complicated creating all of these
yo key value qualifiers for every field
that you had you potentially would have
a whole bunch of fields in a more
complicated application you'd have to
create all these key value qualifiers so
yo modeler makes it really easy to
create these graphically you can see
here I've got song name case insensitive
like song name and cost greater than or
equal to cost what I'm gonna do is add a
couple of fields in here to do more
searches so I'd like to be able to
search by artist oh wait let me double
check
yeah by artist I've conveniently written
some code in here already so I add an
end qualifier and I'm gonna click on to
artist
equals artist and then I'd also like to
be able to do category so let me add
category to category equals category
what's going to be interesting about
this is that for the artist I'm just
finding the two artists relationship if
you remember in the custome oh you can
see that two artists is a method on song
that returns an artist object or an EO
Enterprise object referring to the
artists table but I'm only asking it for
this particular object here in the fetch
pet for category I'm looking at the
actual category field in the category
table so I can put a string in there now
in my web objects template I've got this
query dictionary and I've got it bound
up the song name and costs two fields in
my song table I'm going to add a row for
the category
putting in a field and I'm gonna bind up
my query dictionary using the variables
I specified in my fetch back so query
dictionary dictionary and then I'm going
to add a row below that for the artist
but because I conveniently already put
in a couple of variables I've got this
artist display group and you may
remember in previous sessions where they
discuss the display group you can
configure it to for a particular table
or a particular entity and this one is
for the artist table I've got it set to
fetch on load sorted by artist name so
it's gonna fetch all of the artists I'm
going to bind the displayed objects to
the list I've got an artist object in
here for the item I'd like to display
the artist dot artist name and then I've
got a selection in the selection I'm
gonna by inquiry Dictionary dot artist
because what's interesting about this is
that the pop-up button doesn't give you
back a string which is the name of the
artist it gives you back an actual
artist object I happen to be displaying
in the display string the artist name
but the object the thing that I'm
getting back is an artist object so I
can pass that particular artist into my
fetch back and say give for the
relationship to the artist find all the
songs that match that relationship
if I go back in here and recompile and
to get the changes for my model
I'll get these two new fields in here
they'll let me search and I don't have
to write any more code in order to get
these and out of the thousand demos that
I've done I always seem to forget one
binding in this pop-up button which is
the no selection strength so
let's fetch again and refreshing this
page now I can select so I can select
signing that to Nanak get all artists
and get all the songs by Allison chains
all the songs that begin with C in this
case nothing nothing is found so it's
really easy to add this up and add these
things into your fetch specification
using yo modeler you don't have to write
any new code it's all getting set up
with my query dictionary let's take a
look in a little more detail at how this
is getting done I have a query
dictionary which is a NS mutable
dictionary which I initialize in the
constructor and I bound up these keys
query Dictionary dot cost which is a
field in my song table in this one the
selection is query dictionary two
artists and those all match what's in
the fetch specification Ennio modeler so
and during it during the request
response loop when we when web our just
goes through this page it's going to go
into each one of those forms and say
I've got query dictionary song name so
it's going to look set the song name key
and take the value out of that field and
put it in and remember in
nsmutabledictionary for anyone who
doesn't know the method is set object
for key so it'll set that the value to
song name for the key song name but if
son name doesn't exist it will create a
key song name and set that value in
there
in fact if these are null if I were to
leave one out who will actually remove
it as part of key value coding which is
how I'm able to do a fetch I can say put
in two here and find all of these out
greater than or equal
oh no match found so if we can make a
change to that and I don't keep all of
the fields that were in my query
dictionary so I also have debugging on
in this application oh and if we look at
the query dictionary here you can see
that this is actually an artist's that
was selected and you get an artist
object and I have debugging on where you
can see that the SQL being generated is
the artist ID and a oh F is able to say
find me the artist that matches get its
primary key out match that up with the
foreign key that's in the song table and
do the query that way so the SQL is
being generated for me but I don't have
to deal with that I can just deal with
the objects so that was the search
method a couple of other things I can
add a song so we went through and I hit
the add song button it brings up this
other page what happens with that if I
want to add a song I use the method that
James mentioned create an insert
instance passed at the end in context
that I'm using the sessions default that
in context in this case and the name of
the entity I want to get an object back
that's which is a song entity I have a
method here edit page with song because
I'm actually using the same component to
edit new objects and create and edit
existing objects so I have edit page
with song which simply sets the song to
the song that I've returned and sets the
return page to this which is why when I
come back after creating a song my page
looks the same passing this to the next
page I can return that whoa component
and I get the page back in the same
state it was in which for this number
worked out well for me
if I were to edit a song I simply pass
it the song that I have and this is part
of some of the magic of well repetition
the world repetition allows me to select
one of the songs in that array in the
table and it will set the song variable
automatically to the one that I selected
I don't have to go through and figure
out what it is
song variable gets set to the one I saw
if I delete the same sort of thing
happens it automatically sets the song
instance variable to the object that I
selected in the row and then I as James
was talking about if you were to manage
this array yourself
I removed the object from the array ask
the editing context to delete the song
which just marks it at for deletion and
then when changes are saved the editing
context saves the changes deletes those
objects taking a look at the Edit Page
the save song method on here is again
very simple I ask the editing context to
Save Changes and I return the pray page
that I set now you might wonder where
are these changes coming from where is
it getting all these values I can take a
song object you can see all the instance
variables here and I combined them
directly to fields on the form I can
also bind them to the selection for Papa
buttons so for each one of these pop ups
I have the object that was selected in
the pop-up set to these for the song
binding so I've got song to album and I
combine these up directly hitting save
saves the changes hitting cancel invokes
revert on the editing context
so I just want to try a couple more
forget about the clock we have plenty of
time alright so there's more things that
we can do I didn't specify any sort
orderings yet so I can specify sort
orderings that maybe I'd like to sort
these by artist's name and we can
specify ascending or descending case
insensitive or case sensitive I believe
that this is pretty much if you have
Alice in Chains with the capital a or a
lowercase a they show up in two
different places we'd like them to all
be grouped together so case-insensitive
sort ascending I could sort by a song
name and last maybe do the category and
there are a number of other things that
you can do in here you can set
prefetching which you might find out
about some of the advanced sessions you
can do raw fetches you can actually get
back raw rows rather than getting back
Enterprise objects you can get you just
get back a dictionary of raw rows you
can set options like fetch distinct rows
like I think it's the only SQL I know
select distinct well you know that that
sort of thing we select distinct and if
all of this worked out into some SQL
that could be figured out then SQL will
be set here so we can see already that
SQL is being generated but Yoel modeler
isn't really able to figure out I've got
an artist object how does that relate to
ask you well and that's part of what yo
f is doing for us so now we've got some
sort orderings we've got qualifiers
we're working across relationships
because he owes know about relationships
lots of database access frameworks don't
somehow they forgot about relationships
the relational part of the relational
database but with a neo if I have a song
a song knows about its album it knows
about its artist it knows about its
category but it only knows about it when
we need to get it when we ask for the
artist that's when it goes and gets it
so now that we've got some sort
orderings in there I'll recompile get my
model back into my application
in my application back and now when I
fetch all these should be sorted
I think the absolutely there we go so if
we just sort by you fetch all the
objects in here now they're sorted by
artist song name and category so we've
got all these different songs Dave
Holland something james Dempsey Fitz I
know what the fetch Beck song is and
that's I think that's pretty much it
we've got sort orderings we can use AOF
to do all this REO model or to create
our fetch spec graphically if we switch
back to slides
awesome so the first time I wrote a web
objects app it was a little small app to
exercise the of' actually very similar
this with one addition it was something
that kept track of how many times mac OS
rumours was right and so I wrote a
little code that went out and grabbed
the HTML from their site parsed through
their tags pulled out the heading of
each story and the story itself stuck it
in a database using EOF and I went
through and picked a date of when I
would check back to see if that rumor
was true or not and every morning cuz I
don't know just kind of an Apple watcher
I guess I would go in and check that out
and 20% was about the ratio but that was
usually on things that we're gonna
happen tomorrow or the next day you know
but I highly recommends starting out
with the of' writing a small app of this
nature that exercises those basic
functions right one or two the practice
is good keep it very simple it's
actually one of the best ways to learn
now the magic still this eeo editing
context it does all this stuff I just
get back this array of objects somehow
they're sequel being generated who's
doing what
what's going on here well we're going to
take kind of the nickel tour
the EOF stack of the EO access framework
in the EO control framework to show how
we go from a row to a neo and back now
we'll start with yo access and yo access
is something where you don't
for starters at least do things
programmatically you configure yo access
using yo modeler yo axis actually I'm
going to jump back to slide ho maybe
there we go
yo access is responsible for the
connection to the database it's
responsible for turning those raw rows
into enterprise objects it's responsible
for doing that object relational mapping
and it does so with the help or the
assistance of a model file we don't
really mess around the neo access that
much except that the EO utilities
classed with all those utility methods
is part of the EO access framework so
when you're looking in yo control the
documentation and can't for the life of
you find out where this Co utilities is
it's because it's a neo access now EO
control as we've seen is where we
control things we have in editing
context we fetch insert update delete
that's where we are in control
that's what yo control is for so again
we don't programmatically touch EO
access that much we've seen what do
modeler does has the connection
information of what database we're
hooking up to and has that object to
relational mapping without a model file
EOF is just gonna sit there there it's
not going to connect to a darn thing
so the EO access framework has actually
two layers that we're going to talk
about one is called the adapter layer
and the adapter layer currently the JDBC
adapter is going to is the part of the
framework that is sending sequel to the
database it's generating the sequel
particular to that database it is also
maintaining the connection through the
database it is dealing entirely in raw
raw
data it has never heard of an enterprise
object it's dealing entirely in just the
rows that come back when it gets them
back it hands them up to the database
layer and the database layer has two
very important jobs kind of two raison
d'tre it as one would say if one had a
very poor French accent the two things
that the database layer does is first of
all its job is to turn that raw row into
an EO it's kind of like Pinocchio
becoming a real boy it was just a plain
behavior 'less bunch of data now it's an
enterprise object that represents the
the logic of your business the second
thing that it does is it takes a
snapshot of the data that came in from
the database and stores it and it holds
on to it one so we can cache and so EOF
might save itself a trip to the database
later because it already has the
information we already went to the
database and it also holds on to it so
that when we save those changes we're
able to check hey did somebody change
that row out from under us what were the
values when we first fetched those items
those are called snapshots and as you go
more and more into eof you'll learn more
and more about them I just wanted to
point them out and let you know where
they lived
so once things are out of the access
framework they're fully formed AOS the
snapshots been taken then we move on to
geo control oh one more thing I
mentioned earlier that multiple data
sources was something that a Oh F did
very very well and in fact it's so
arduous to set up a second data source
what you do is you make a second model
file you add that model file to your
project and as you are fetching using
entities in both models EOF will
automatically come up with the objects
to connect to both databases and both of
those are going to be fetching raw rows
turning them into eos and the like a
note not all databases are orange I
should have picked a different color too
distinguished it's also important to
note I did not get a chance to change
this that really that whole row that
whole line is the database layer what yo
f is doing is making a couple of objects
in each layer for each connection down
to a data source but again the takeaway
add another model that connects to
another data source you're connecting
the multiple data sources the rest is
handled pretty automatically by EOF now
you may come across this object to class
called the EEO model group it lives it
exists because we can have multiple
models and so we have an object that
manages those models that's what it's
job is those are kind of the big-ticket
items of what's going on in a oxs now
let's go through so we've gotten these
things up out of the database we have
multiple data sources we might be
connecting to and how are you going to
control what sequel gets sent here what
sequel gets sent their customers live
over here something else lives over here
well we have kind of a traffic cop in
the EEO control framework called the
object store coordinator you'll run
across this as you're reading the
documentation you don't talk to the
object store coordinator
programmatically all that often it's
just nice to know that the OSC is
they're just directing traffic for you
and then on top of the objects their
coordinator is the thing we're familiar
with the editing context so I wanted to
just show you how things get from the
database and who are the players along
the way so that you don't think it's
just magic and I don't understand
exactly what's going on this is pretty
much the Grand Tour of EOF and of course
we can have different editing contexts
by default one per user session and
they're all talking through the same
object store coordinator they're all
using that same model they're all
sharing the snapshots stored at the
database layer and they're all
connecting through the adapter layer
so that is the big ol walkthrough of EOF
now um let's review so well actually I
wrote a little song about it so let's uh
let's do that for a moment oh cool I
feel like the
[Applause]
all right so mm so how many persistence
object persistence frameworks in the
world are there that people enjoy using
so much that they write a little song
about them oh this is my first time
playing guitar in public so so it might
just suck to be you
[Music]
fit stick baby you can stimulate the
objects you wanna fetch in beauty yo coz
O's whenever you fetch you're gonna get
some of those yo zero zeros their
database Rose wrapped in low clothes
well that respect it helps you specify
the objects you wanna fetch as its name
implies with a fetch spec you can
stimulate those objects
you wanna fetch and manipulate or
iterate over each object in the array
yeah yeah yeah over each object
you wanna display
yeah yeah well I see what kind of
objects are they gonna be well you've
got to specify which entity in the
criteria of what you desire you're gonna
wrap that up into a qualifier willing
don't forget about those sword all the
Rings determines the order of objects
the fit spec will bring me
[Music]
who's gonna fetch for you don't be
perplexed it's an object editing context
well that editing context it is your pal
you can think of it like in the old
Corral you get back in an array of the
ones that you choose you make a change
the editing context it knows then spec
it helps you specify those objects you
wanna fit baby you can stimulate those
objects you wanna fetch in a sing-along
let's spin it helps you to specify the
objects you wanna fetch as its name
implies with a fetch split baby you can
stipulate those objects
you wanna fetch it this was a little
song about you if I you get the gist
it is a framework that helps your
[Music]
except for them
there's the web objects lab so hold on
hold on just a second before we move on
I just have to ask you one question sure
do you have an agent so first time on
stage huh so if you guys ever want to
repeat ooh this list let us know and in
case you didn't notice James is also on
stage inside the classroom on almost a
weekly basis um a little less but yeah
so if you want a little bit more
information from him regarding UF and
other pieces of our technology you can
sign up for web objects class right
thank you go to the web objects lab and
build one of these apps like Mark it
showed you I'll be very good and roadmap
we didn't talk a lot about using yo
modeler here because data modeling and
connectivity is all about that which is
groovy advanced enterprise objects
framework is going to be an awesome
session that's I'm going to be there
because I love just always here and more
and the feedback for him and with that
who to contact looks familiar from every
other session
you